---
stand_alone: true
ipr: trust200902
docname: draft-tschofenig-core-coap-tcp-tls-02.txt
cat: std
pi:
  strict: 'yes'
  toc: 'yes'
  tocdepth: '2'
  symrefs: 'yes'
  sortrefs: 'yes'
  compact: 'no'
  subcompact: 'no'
  comments: 'yes'
  inline: 'yes'
title: A TCP and TLS Transport for the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)
abbrev: TCP/TLS Transport for CoAP
area: Applications Area (app)
wg: CORE
author:
- ins: S. Lemay
  name: Simon Lemay
  org: Zebra Technologies
  street: 820 W. Jackson Blvd.suite 700
  city: Chicago
  code: '60607'
  country: United States of America
  phone: "+1-847-634-6700"
  email: slemay@zebra.com
- ins: V. Solorzano Barboza
  name: Valik Solorzano Barboza
  org: Zebra Technologies
  street: 820 W. Jackson Blvd. suite 700
  city: Chicago
  code: '60607'
  country: United States of America
  phone: "+1-847-634-6700"
  email: vsolorzanobarboza@zebra.com
- ins: H. Tschofenig
  name: Hannes Tschofenig
  org: ARM Ltd.
  street: 110 Fulbourn Rd
  city: Cambridge
  code: CB1 9NJ
  country: Great Britain
  email: Hannes.tschofenig@gmx.net
  uri: http://www.tschofenig.priv.at
- ins: C. Bormann
  name: Carsten Bormann
  org: Universitaet Bremen TZI
  street: Postfach 330440
  city: Bremen
  code: D-28359
  country: Germany
  phone: "+49-421-218-63921"
  email: cabo@tzi.org
normative:
  RFC5246: tls
  RFC7252: coap
  RFC2119: bcp14
  RFC4395: urireg
  RFC0793: tcp
  RFC7301: alpn
  I-D.ietf-dice-profile: 
informative:
  RFC0768: udp
  RFC1122: std3
  RFC6347: dtls
  RFC6335: portreg

--- abstract

The Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) has been designed with TCP as an underlying
transport protocol. The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP), which has
been inspired by HTTP, has on the other hand been defined to make use of
UDP. Therefore, reliable delivery and a simple congestion control and flow control mechanism
are provided by the message layer of the CoAP protocol.
A number of environments benefit from the use of CoAP directly over a
reliable byte stream that already provides these services.
This document defines the use of CoAP over TCP as well as CoAP over TLS.

--- middle

# Introduction {#introduction}

The Internet protocol stack is organized in layers, namely link layer,
internet layer, transport layer, and the application layer
({{RFC1122}}).

IP emerged as the waist of the hour glass and supports a variety of
link layers and new link layer technologies can be added in the
future, without affecting IP.

Combined with the end-to-end principle, the hour glass indicates the
level of protocol understanding that intermediaries need to have in order
to forward IP packets between a sender and a receiver (absent
any specific application layer entities, such as proxies or caches).
Having IP as the waist means that anyone can extend the layers above
the network layer in the way they want to communicate end-to-end,
including defining new transport layer protocols (as it was done with
SCTP, and DCCP).
<!-- Need references for those?  Why all this verbiage anyway? -->

Unfortunately, some network deployments depart from this architecture.
The [Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)](#RFC7252) was designed
for Internet of Things (IoT) deployments, assuming that UDP can be
used freely -- UDP {{RFC0768}}, or DTLS {{RFC6347}} over UDP, is a good choice for
transferring small amounts of data in networks that follow the IP
architecture.
Some CoAP deployments, however, may have to integrate well with
existing enterprise infrastructure, where the use of UDP-based
protocols may not be well-received or even supported by firewalls.
Middleboxes that are unaware of the IoT can make the use of UDP
brittle.

Also, some environments benefit from the more advanced congestion
control and flow control capabilities provided by TCP.  For instance,
CoAP back-end processors in a cloud environment may want to connect
between each other via TCP instead of UDP.

To make both IoT devices and their associated back-end processors work
smoothly in these demanding environments, CoAP needs
to make use of a different transport protocol, namely TCP
{{RFC0793}} and in some situations even TLS {{RFC5246}}.

The present document
document describes a shim header that conveys length information about
each CoAP message included.  Modifications to CoAP beyond the replacement of
the message layer
(e.g., to introduce further optimizations) are intentionally avoided.


# Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in {{RFC2119}}.


# Constrained Application Protocol

The interaction model of CoAP over TCP is very similar to the one for
CoAP over UDP with the key difference that TCP voids the need to
provide certain transport layer protocol features, such as reliable
delivery, fragmentation and reassembly, as well as congestion control,
at the CoAP level. The protocol stack is illustrated in {{stack}} (derived
from {{RFC7252}}, Figure 1).

~~~~
        +----------------------+
        |      Application     |
        +----------------------+
        +----------------------+
        |  Requests/Responses  |  CoAP (RFC7252)
        |----------------------|
        |    Message adapter   |  this document
        +----------------------+
        +-----------+    ^
        |    TLS    |    |
        +-----------+    v
        +----------------------+
        |          TCP         |
        +----------------------+
~~~~
{: #stack title='The CoAP over TLS/TCP Protocol Stack'}


TCP offers features that are not available in UDP and consequently
have been provided in CoAP's message layer. The first mechanism that
can be omitted is the concept of ACKs in CoAP.  Since TCP offers
reliable delivery, there is no need to offer a redundant
acknowledgement at the CoAP messaging layer.

Hence, the only message type supported when using CoAP over TCP is
the Non-confirmable message (NON).  By nature of TCP, a NON over TCP is still transmitted
reliably. {{NON}} (derived from {{RFC7252}}, Figure 3) shows this
message exchange graphically.

Similarly, there is no need to detect duplicate delivery of a message.
In UDP CoAP, the Message ID is used for relating acknowledgements to
Confirmable messages as well as for duplicate detection.
Since the Message ID thus is not meaningful over TCP, it is elided (as indicated by the
dashes in {{NON}}).

~~~~

        Client              Server
           |                  |
           |   NON [------]   |
           +----------------->|
           |                  |
~~~~
{: #NON title='NON Message Transmission over TCP.'}


As a result of removing the message layer in CoAP over TCP, the only supported message type
from the ones CoAP over UDP provides is the NON type. A response is sent back as defined
in {{RFC7252}}, as
illustrated in {{NON2}} (derived from {{RFC7252}}, Figure 6).


~~~~

        Client              Server
           |                  |
           |   NON [------]   |
           | GET /temperature |
           |   (Token 0x74)   |
           +----------------->|
           |                  |
           |   NON [------]   |
           |   2.05 Content   |
           |   (Token 0x74)   |
           |     "22.5 C"     |
           |<-----------------+
           |                  |
~~~~
{: #NON2 title='NON Request/Response.'}



# Message Format

The CoAP message format defined in {{RFC7252}}, as shown in
{{CoAP-Header}}, relies on the datagram transport (UDP, or DTLS over
UDP) for keeping the individual messages separate.

~~~~
    0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |Ver| T |  TKL  |      Code     |          Message ID           |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Token (if any, TKL bytes) ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Options (if any) ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1|    Payload (if any) ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~
{: #CoAP-Header title='RFC 7252 defined CoAP Message Format.'}


In a stream oriented transport protocol such as TCP, some other form
of delimiting messages is needed.  For this purpose, CoAP over TCP
introduces a length field.  {{Shim}} shows the 2-byte shim header
carrying length information prepending the CoAP message header.

~~~~
     0                   1                   2                   3
    0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |        Message Length         |Ver| T |  TKL  |      Code     |
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Token (if any, TKL bytes) ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Options (if any) ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1|    Payload (if any) ...
   +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~
{: #Shim title='CoAP Header with prepended Shim Header.'}


The 'Message Length' field is a 16-bit unsigned integer in network
byte order. It provides the length of the subsequent CoAP message
(including the CoAP header but excluding this message length field) in
bytes.  T is always the code for NON (1).  The Message ID is
meaningless and thus elided.  The semantics of the other CoAP header
fields is left unchanged.

When CoAP is used over TLS then each CoAP message is transported in a
separate TLS record layer message, making the shim header that includes the
length information redundant.  As such, the two-byte shim header MUST be omitted
when CoAP messages are carried over TLS.[^2]

[^2]: Hmm, how does that work in real-life implementations.
    RFC 5246 says: »Client
   message boundaries are not preserved in the record layer (i.e.,
   multiple client messages of the same ContentType MAY be coalesced
   into a single TLSPlaintext record, or a single message MAY be
   fragmented across several records).«
    Also, is this really efficient?  This means we get a MAC per CoAP message.
{:cabo}

# CoAP URI {#URI}

CoAP {{RFC7252}} defines the "coap" and "coaps" URI schemes for
identifying CoAP resources and providing a means of locating the
resource. RFC 7252 defines these resources for use with CoAP over UDP.

The present specification introduces two new URI schemes, namely "coap+tcp"
and "coaps+tcp".  The rules from Section 6 of {{RFC7252}} apply to
these two new URI schemes.

{{RFC7252}}, Section 8 (Multicast CoAP), does not apply to the URI
schemes defined in the present specification.

   Resources made available via one of the "coap+tcp" or "coaps+tcp" schemes
   have no shared identity with the other scheme or with the "coap" or
   "coaps" scheme, even if their resource identifiers indicate the
   same authority (the same host listening to the same port).
   The schemes constiture distinct namespaces and, in combination with
   the authority, are considered to be distinct
   origin servers.


## coap+tcp URI scheme

~~~
coap-tcp-URI = "coap+tcp:" "//" host [ ":" port ] path-abempty 
               [ "?" query ]
~~~

The semantics defined in {{RFC7252}}, Section 6.1, applies to this
URI scheme, with the following changes:

* The port subcomponent indicates the TCP port
   at which the CoAP server is located.  (If it is empty or not given,
   then the default port 5683 is assumed, as with UDP.)

## coaps+tcp URI scheme

~~~
coaps-tcp-URI = "coaps+tcp:" "//" host [ ":" port ] path-abempty 
                [ "?" query ]
~~~

The semantics defined in {{RFC7252}}, Section 6.2, applies to this
URI scheme, with the following changes:

* The port subcomponent indicates the TCP port
   at which the TLS server for the CoAP server is located.  If it is empty or not given,
   then the default port 443 is assumed (this is different from the
   default port for "coaps", i.e., CoAP over DTLS over UDP).

* When CoAP is exchanged over TLS port 443 then the "TLS Application
Layer Protocol Negotiation Extension"
{{-alpn}} MUST be used to allow demultiplexing
at the server-side unless out-of-band information ensures that the
client only interacts with a server that is able to demultiplex CoAP
messages over port 443. This would, for example, be true for many
Internet of Things deployments where clients are pre-configured to
only ever talk with specific servers.[^1]{:cabo}

[^1]: Shouldn't we simply always require ALPN?  As the text stands, it
      is not clear for a client when it has to send ALPN and when not.

{:cabo: source="cabo"}

# Security Considerations {#security}

This document defines how to convey CoAP over TCP and TLS. It does not
introduce new vulnerabilities beyond those described already in the
CoAP specification. CoAP {{RFC7252}} makes use of DTLS 1.2 and this
specification consequently uses TLS 1.2 {{RFC5246}}. CoAP MUST NOT be
used with older versions of TLS. Guidelines for use of cipher suites
and TLS extensions can be found in {{I-D.ietf-dice-profile}}.



# IANA Considerations {#iana}

## Service Name and Port Number Registration

IANA is requested to assign the port number 5683 and the service name "coap+tcp",
in accordance with {{RFC6335}}.

Service Name.
: coap+tcp

Transport Protocol.
: tcp

Assignee.
: IESG \<iesg@ietf.org>

Contact.
: IETF Chair \<chair@ietf.org>

Description.
: Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)

Reference.
: [RFCthis]

Port Number.
: 5683
{: vspace='0'}

Similarly, IANA is requested to assign the
service name "coaps+tcp", in accordance with {{RFC6335}}.
However, no separate port number is used for coaps over TCP; instead,
the ALPN protocol ID defined in {{alpnpid}} is used over port 443.

Service Name.
: coaps+tcp

Transport Protocol.
: tcp

Assignee.
: IESG \<iesg@ietf.org>

Contact.
: IETF Chair \<chair@ietf.org>

Description.
: Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)

Reference.
: {{-alpn}}, [RFCthis]

Port Number.
: 443  (see also {{alpnpid}} of [RFCthis]})
{: vspace='0'}

## URI Schemes

This document registers two new URI schemes, namely "coap+tcp" and
"coaps+tcp", for the use of CoAP over TCP and for CoAP over TLS over
TCP, respectively. The "coap+tcp" and "coaps+tcp" URI schemes can thus
be compared to the "http" and "https" URI schemes.

The syntax of the "coap" and "coaps" URI schemes is specified in
Section 6 of {{RFC7252}} and the present document re-uses their
semantics for "coap+tcp" and "coaps+tcp", respectively, with the
exception that TCP, or TLS over TCP is used as a transport protocol.

IANA is requested to add these new URI schemes to the registry
established with {{RFC4395}}.


## ALPN Protocol ID {#alpnpid}

This document requests a value from the "Application Layer Protocol
Negotiation (ALPN) Protocol IDs" created by {{-alpn}}:

Protocol:
: CoAP

Identification Sequence:
: 0x63 0x6f 0x61 0x70 ("coap")

Reference:
: [RFCthis]
{: vspace='0'}




# Acknowledgements {#acknowledgements}

We would like to thank Michael Koster, Zach Shelby, Matthias Kovatsch, and
Szymon Sasin for their feedback.


--- back

<!--  LocalWords:  TCP CoAP UDP firewalling firewalled TLS IP SCTP
 -->
<!--  LocalWords:  DCCP IoT optimizations ACKs acknowledgement TKL
 -->
<!--  LocalWords:  prepending URI DTLS demultiplexing demultiplex pre
 -->
<!--  LocalWords:  IANA ALPN
 -->

